Research, the world over, has established the anchoring role of family in the physical, cognitive, emotional and psycho-social development of an individual.  Any weakening of this structure negatively impacts the prospects of all the members, especially the children.

In India, 29.6 million children live without parental care, that is, they lack the oversight of at least one of their parents. These children, who have been temporarily or permanently separated from their biological families, need protection in the form of quality alternative care. The grave reality is that only 1.5% receive any sort of formal alternative care. On the ground, programmes entailing child-centric family strengthening measures or community-based care for such children are almost non-existent. More efforts are needed by the government to promote adoption.

Most children living in alternative care setups are expected to become independent at the age of 18. Without receiving any further guidance or support, many fall prey to the vulnerabilities faced by young people.

The lack of understanding on how to implement systems of care such as counselling or trauma-informed care approach for the mental well-being of such children compounds the problem. India also has a deficiency of research and data available on the number of children requiring or living in alternative care.  The pandemic has only exacerbated this issue and added to these numbers.

Udayan Care strongly believes that residential care should always be the last resort, and there should be a greater emphasis on family strengthening and community-based care. However, institutional care is still the most popular choice resorted to by the gatekeeping agencies of juvenile justice in India.

At Udayan Care, we are committed to ensuring sustainable and holistic development of children and youth, by upholding their rights and looking after their well-being. We nurture them with care and prepare them for life, staying by their side through different phases of life—childhood, adolescence, and adulthood, just as a family would. In whatever we do, we always put children first.